---
layout:     post
title:      "Passkeys: first impressions on WebAuthN"
date:       2024-05-09
categories: [blog]
author:     Daniel Garnier-Moiroux
lang:       en
excerpt:    "I've been implementing WebAuthN to enable passkey support in web apps, here are a few
            impressions."
---

Passkeys have been trending in the past few years. The term was first introduced by Apple in their
2022 WWDC conference. Then we've heard of FIDO. In 2023, more and more passkeys related-talks started
popping up during various conferences. And, in early 2024, the big SaaS and cloud vendors have been
nudging users to use passkeys to login - Okta, Google, Github...

I gave my own take on a passkey talk in March 2024 at Voxxed Zürich, and then in April 2024 with
Josh Long at Devoxx France. I wanted to do something a bit different than what I had seen
previously: focus on the actual implementation in a real app, rather than going through slides and
explaining all the details.

On top of building a demo app, I've been collaborating with Rob Winch on bringing Passkey support to
Spring Security[^1].

Therefore, I have Opinion™.


## User adoption is still very low

Even at tech conferences, where the crowd is tech-curious and generally in the "early adopter"-ish
cohort, attendees did not really know what to expect about passkeys. At Devoxx France, out of
several hundred folks in the room, less than 50% had even heard of passkeys, and only 2 people
actually used passkeys.

While there is a push from vendors, we are still in the "early adoption" phase of the technology
curve. Some awareness, but a lot of inertia. Doing a demo using a security dongle (e.g. Yubikey)
does not seem super exciting to developers. However, showing newer stuff like logging in on your Mac
with your fingerprint reader, or using a nearby device, garners a lot more attention.

The flow for logging in with a nearby device goes like so:

1. On their computer, the user navigates to the target website and clicks "log in with a passkey"
2. A modal dialog shows up, and the user selects "log in with a QR code / using a nearby device"
3. Using their phone, the user scans the QR code, and log in using their phone authenticator (e.g.
   FaceID on an iPhone)
4. Wait for a few seconds ...
5. User is logged in on their computer, without having typed any password.

This very portable authentication method has quite the "wow effect". I do think that, over the long
term, this technology will catch on.


## The "consumer vs entreprise" tension

There seems to be some tension in the use-cases for passkeys. Members of the FIDO alliance, such as
Apple, want their **F**ast **ID**entity **O**nline for consumers: widespread adoption, ease of use.
Vendors of security solutions, such as Yubikey or entreprise-grade password managers, want extreme
extensibility with many security checks built-in.

Those use-cases are at odds: you can't have something simple that is also infinitely extensible. And
so the developer API for integrating passkeys is unspeakably complicated.


## The WebAuthN API is ... 😱️



[^1]: Rob did all the hard work. I've only provided feedback, along with the occasional design and
    API discussion.




---

TODO: links
